.\" iamb(7) manual page
.\"
.\" This manual page is written using the mdoc(7) macros. For more
.\" information, see <https://manpages.bsd.lv/mdoc.html>.
.\"
.\" You can preview this file with:
.\"     $ man ./docs/iamb.1
.Dd Mar 24, 2024
.Dt IAMB 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm config.toml
.Nd configuration file for
.Sy iamb
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Configuration must be placed under
.Pa ~/.config/iamb/
and named
.Nm .
(If
.Ev $XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is set, then
.Sy iamb
will look for a directory named
.Pa iamb
there instead.)
.Pp
Example configuration usually comes bundled with your installation and can
typically be found in
.Pa /usr/share/iamb .
.Pp
As implied by the filename, the configuration is formatted in TOML.
It's structure and fields are described below.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
These options are sections at the top-level of the file.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy profiles
A map of profile names containing per-account information.
See
.Sx PROFILES .
.It Sy default_profile
The name of the default profile to connect to, unless overwritten by a
commandline switch.
It should be one of the names defined in the
.Sy profiles
section.
.It Sy settings
Overwrite general settings for
.Sy iamb .
See
.Sx SETTINGS
for a description of possible values.
.It Sy layout
Configure the default window layout to use when starting
.Sy iamb .
See
.Sx "STARTUP LAYOUT"
for more information on how to configure this object.
.It Sy macros
Map keybindings to other keybindings.
See
.Sx "CUSTOM KEYBINDINGS"
for how to configure this object.
.It Sy dirs
Configure the directories to use for data, logs, and more.
See
.Sx DIRECTORIES
for the possible values you can set in this object.
.It Sy proxy
Configure an HTTP/SOCKS proxy for Matrix traffic.
See
.Sx PROXY .
.El
.Sh PROXY
The
.Sy [proxy]
section configures a proxy for all outgoing Matrix HTTP requests.
If unset, no proxy is used for the built-in client (environment variables
such as
.Ev ALL_PROXY
are not read by default).
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy url
Proxy URL, e.g.
.Dq socks5://127.0.0.1:1080
for a SOCKS5 proxy.
Requires the reqwest
.Sy socks
feature (enabled in this build).
.El
.Pp
.Sy proxy
can be overridden per profile under
.Sx PROFILES .
.Sh PROFILES
These options are configured as fields in the
.Sy profiles
object.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy user_id
The user ID to use when connecting to the server.
For example "user" in "@user:matrix.org".
.It Sy url
The URL of the user's server.
(For example "https://matrix.org" for "@user:matrix.org".)
This is only needed when the server does not have a
.Pa /.well-known/matrix/client
entry.
.El
.Pp
In addition to the above fields, you can also reuse the following fields to set
per-profile overrides of their global values:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -width 1m
.It
.Sy dirs
.It
.Sy layout
.It
.Sy macros
.It
.Sy settings
.It
.Sy proxy
.El
.Ss Example 1: A single profile
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[profiles.personal]
user_id = "@user:matrix.org"
.Ed
.Ss Example 2: Two profiles with a default
In the following example, there are two profiles,
.Dq personal
(set to be the default) and
.Dq work .
The
.Dq work
profile has an explicit URL set for its homeserver.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
default_profile = "personal"

[profiles.personal]
user_id = "@user:matrix.org"

[profiles.work]
user_id = "@user:example.com"
url = "https://matrix.example.com"
.Ed
.Sh SETTINGS
These options are configured as an object under the
.Sy settings
key and can be overridden as described in
.Sx PROFILES .
.Bl -tag -width Ds

.It Sy external_edit_file_suffix
Suffix to append to temporary file names when using the :editor command. Defaults to .md.

.It Sy default_room
The room to show by default instead of the
.Sy :welcome
window.

.It Sy image_preview
Enable image previews and configure it.
An empty object will enable the feature with default settings, omitting it will disable the feature.
The available fields in this object are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy size
An optional object with
.Sy width
and
.Sy height
fields to specify the preview size in cells.
Defaults to 66 and 10.
.It Sy protocol
An optional object to override settings that will normally be guessed automatically:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy type
An optional string set to one of the protocol types:
.Dq Sy sixel ,
.Dq Sy kitty , and
.Dq Sy halfblocks .
.It Sy font_size
An optional list of two numbers representing font width and height in pixels.
.El
.El
.It Sy log_level
Specifies the lowest log level that should be shown.
Possible values are:
.Dq Sy trace ,
.Dq Sy debug ,
.Dq Sy info ,
.Dq Sy warn , and
.Dq Sy error .

.It Sy message_shortcode_display
Defines whether or not Emoji characters in messages should be replaced by their
respective shortcodes.

.It Sy message_user_color
Defines whether or not the message body is colored like the username.

.It Sy normal_after_send
Defines whether to reset input to Normal mode after sending a message.

.It Sy notifications
When this subsection is present, you can enable and configure push notifications.
See
.Sx NOTIFICATIONS
for more details.

.It Sy open_command
Defines a custom  command and its arguments to run when opening downloads instead of the default.
(For example,
.Sy ["my-open",\ "--file"] . )

.It Sy reaction_display
Defines whether or not reactions should be shown.

.It Sy reaction_shortcode_display
Defines whether or not reactions should be shown as their respective shortcode.

.It Sy read_receipt_send
Defines whether or not read confirmations are sent.

.It Sy read_receipt_display
Defines whether or not read confirmations are displayed.

.It Sy request_timeout
Defines the maximum time per request in seconds.

.It Sy sort
Configures how to sort the lists shown in windows like
.Sy :rooms
or
.Sy :members .
See
.Sx "SORTING LISTS"
for more details.

.It Sy state_event_display
Defines whether the state events like joined or left are shown.

.It Sy typing_notice_send
Defines whether or not the typing state is sent.

.It Sy typing_notice_display
Defines whether or not the typing state is displayed.

.It Sy user
Overrides values for the specified user.
See
.Sx "USER OVERRIDES"
for details on the format.

.It Sy username_display
Defines how usernames are shown for message senders.
Possible values are
.Dq Sy username ,
.Dq Sy localpart , or
.Dq Sy displayname .

.It Sy user_gutter_width
Specify the width of the column where usernames are displayed in a room.
Usernames that are too long are truncated.
Defaults to 30.

.It Sy tabstop
Number of spaces that a <Tab> counts for.
Defaults to 4.
.El

.Ss Example 1: Avoid showing Emojis (useful for terminals w/o support)
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[settings]
username = "username"
message_shortcode_display = true
reaction_shortcode_display = true
.Ed

.Ss Example 2: Increase request timeout to 2 minutes for a slow homeserver
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[settings]
request_timeout = 120
.Ed

.Sh NOTIFICATIONS

The
.Sy settings.notifications
subsection allows configuring how notifications for new messages behave.

The available fields in this subsection are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy enabled
Defaults to
.Sy false .
Setting this field to
.Sy true
enables notifications.

.It Sy via
Defaults to
.Dq Sy desktop
to use the desktop mechanism (default).
Setting this field to
.Dq Sy bell
will use the terminal bell instead.
Both can be used via
.Dq Sy desktop|bell .

.It Sy show_message
controls whether to show the message in the desktop notification, and defaults to
.Sy true .
Messages are truncated beyond a small length.
The notification rules are stored server side, loaded once at startup, and are currently not configurable in iamb.
In other words, you can simply change the rules with another client.
.El

.Ss Example 1: Enable notifications with default options
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[settings]
notifications = {}
.Ed
.Ss Example 2: Enable notifications using terminal bell
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[settings.notifications]
via = "bell"
show_message = false
.Ed

.Sh "SORTING LISTS"

The
.Sy settings.sort
subsection allows configuring how different windows have their contents sorted.

Fields available within this subsection are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy rooms
How to sort the
.Sy :rooms
window.
Defaults to
.Sy ["favorite",\ "lowpriority",\ "unread",\ "name"] .
.It Sy chats
How to sort the
.Sy :chats
window.
Defaults to the
.Sy rooms
value.
.It Sy dms
How to sort the
.Sy :dms
window.
Defaults to the
.Sy rooms
value.
.It Sy spaces
How to sort the
.Sy :spaces
window.
Defaults to the
.Sy rooms
value.
.It Sy members
How to sort the
.Sy :members
window.
Defaults to
.Sy ["power",\ "id"] .
.El

The available values are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy favorite
Put favorite rooms before other rooms.
.It Sy lowpriority
Put lowpriority rooms after other rooms.
.It Sy name
Sort rooms by alphabetically ascending room name.
.It Sy alias
Sort rooms by alphabetically ascending canonical room alias.
.It Sy id
Sort rooms by alphabetically ascending Matrix room identifier.
.It Sy unread
Put unread rooms before other rooms.
.It Sy recent
Sort rooms by most recent message timestamp.
.It Sy invite
Put invites before other rooms.
.El
.El

.Ss Example 1: Group room members by their server first
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[settings.sort]
members = ["server", "localpart"]
.Ed

.Sh "USER OVERRIDES"

The
.Sy settings.users
subsections allows overriding how specific senders are displayed.
Overrides are mapped onto Matrix User IDs such as
.Sy @user:matrix.org ,
and are typically written as inline tables containing the following keys:

.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy name
Change the display name of the user.

.It Sy color
Change the color the user is shown as.
Possible values are:
.Dq Sy black ,
.Dq Sy blue ,
.Dq Sy cyan ,
.Dq Sy dark-gray ,
.Dq Sy gray ,
.Dq Sy green ,
.Dq Sy light-blue ,
.Dq Sy light-cyan ,
.Dq Sy light-green ,
.Dq Sy light-magenta ,
.Dq Sy light-red ,
.Dq Sy light-yellow ,
.Dq Sy magenta ,
.Dq Sy none ,
.Dq Sy red ,
.Dq Sy white ,
and
.Dq Sy yellow .
.El

.Ss Example 1: Override how @ada:example.com appears in chat
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[settings.users]
"@ada:example.com" = { name = "Ada Lovelace", color = "light-red" }
.Ed

.Sh STARTUP LAYOUT

The
.Sy layout
section allows configuring the initial set of tabs and windows to show when
starting the client.

.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy style
Specifies what window layout to load when starting.
Valid values are
.Dq Sy restore
to restore the layout from the last time the client was exited,
.Dq Sy new
to open a single window (uses the value of
.Sy default_room
if set), or
.Dq Sy config
to open the layout described under
.Sy tabs .

.It Sy tabs
If
.Sy style
is set to
.Sy config ,
then this value will be used to open a set of tabs and windows at startup.
Each object can contain either a
.Sy window
key specifying a username, room identifier or room alias to show, or a
.Sy split
key specifying an array of window objects.
.El

.Ss Example 1: Show a single room every startup
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[settings]
default_room = "#iamb-users:0x.badd.cafe"

[layout]
style = "new"
.Ed
.Ss Example 2: Show a specific layout every startup
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[layout]
style = "config"

[[layout.tabs]]
window = "iamb://dms"

[[layout.tabs]]
window = "iamb://rooms"

[[layout.tabs]]
split = [
    { "window" = "#iamb-users:0x.badd.cafe" },
    { "window" = "#iamb-dev:0x.badd.cafe" }
]
.Ed

.Sh "CUSTOM KEYBINDINGS"

The
.Sy macros
subsections allow configuring custom keybindings.
Available subsections are:

.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy insert , Sy i
Map the key sequences in this section in
.Sy Insert
mode.

.It Sy normal , Sy n
Map the key sequences in this section in
.Sy Normal
mode.

.It Sy visual , Sy v
Map the key sequences in this section in
.Sy Visual
mode.

.It Sy select
Map the key sequences in this section in
.Sy Select
mode.

.It Sy command , Sy c
Map the key sequences in this section in
.Sy Visual
mode.

.It Sy operator-pending
Map the key sequences in this section in
.Sy "Operator Pending"
mode.
.El

Multiple modes can be given together by separating their names with
.Dq Sy | .

.Ss Example 1: Use "jj" to exit Insert mode
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[macros.insert]
"jj" = "<Esc>"
.Ed

.Ss Example 2: Use "V" for switching between message bar and room history
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[macros."normal|visual"]
"V" = "<C-W>m"
.Ed

.Sh DIRECTORIES

Specifies the directories to save data in.
Configured as an object under the key
.Sy dirs .

.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy cache
Specifies where to store assets and temporary data in.
(For example,
.Sy image_preview
and
.Sy logs
will also go in here by default.)
Defaults to
.Ev $XDG_CACHE_HOME/iamb .

.It Sy data
Specifies where to store persistent data in, such as E2EE room keys.
Defaults to
.Ev $XDG_DATA_HOME/iamb .

.It Sy downloads
Specifies where to store downloaded files.
Defaults to
.Ev $XDG_DOWNLOAD_DIR .

.It Sy image_previews
Specifies where to store automatically downloaded image previews.
Defaults to
.Ev ${cache}/image_preview_downloads .

.It Sy logs
Specifies where to store log files.
Defaults to
.Ev ${cache}/logs .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.config/iamb/config.toml
The TOML configuration file that
.Sy iamb
loads by default.
.It Pa ~/.config/iamb/config.json
A JSON configuration file that
.Sy iamb
will load if the TOML one is not found.
.It Pa /usr/share/iamb/config.example.toml
A sample configuration file with examples of how to set different values.
.El
.Sh "REPORTING BUGS"
Please report bugs in
.Sy iamb
or its manual pages at
.Lk https://github.com/ulyssa/iamb/issues
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr iamb 1
.Pp
Extended documentation is available online at
.Lk https://iamb.chat
