.\" iamb(1) manual page
.\"
.\" This manual page is written using the mdoc(7) macros. For more
.\" information, see <https://manpages.bsd.lv/mdoc.html>.
.\"
.\" You can preview this file with:
.\"     $ man ./docs/iamb.1
.Dd Mar 24, 2024
.Dt IAMB 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm iamb
.Nd a terminal-based client for Matrix for the Vim addict
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl hV
.Op Fl P Ar profile
.Op Fl C Ar dir
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a client for the Matrix communication protocol.
It provides a terminal user interface with familiar Vim keybindings, and
includes support for multiple profiles, threads, spaces, notifications,
reactions, custom keybindings, and more.
.Pp
This manual page includes a quick rundown of the available commands in
.Nm .
For example usage and a full description of each one and its arguments, please
refer to the full documentation online.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl P , Fl Fl profile
The profile to start
.Nm
with.
If this flag is not specified,
then it defaults to using
.Sy default_profile
(see
.Xr iamb 5 ) .
.It Fl C , Fl Fl config-directory
Path to the directory the configuration file is located in.
.It Fl h , Fl Fl help
Show the help text and quit.
.It Fl V , Fl Fl version
Show the current
.Nm
version and quit.
.El

.Sh "GENERAL COMMANDS"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy ":chats"
View a list of joined rooms and direct messages.
.It Sy ":dms"
View a list of direct messages.
.It Sy ":logout [user id]"
Log out of
.Nm .
.It Sy ":rooms"
View a list of joined rooms.
.It Sy ":spaces"
View a list of joined spaces.
.It Sy ":unreads"
View a list of unread rooms.
.It Sy ":unreads clear"
Mark all rooms as read.
.It Sy ":welcome"
View the startup Welcome window.
.El

.Sh "E2EE COMMANDS"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy ":keys export [path] [passphrase]"
Export and encrypt keys to
.Pa path .
.It Sy ":keys import [path] [passphrase]"
Import and decrypt keys from
.Pa path .
.It Sy ":verify"
View a list of ongoing E2EE verifications.
.It Sy ":verify accept [key]"
Accept a verification request.
.It Sy ":verify cancel [key]"
Cancel an in-progress verification.
.It Sy ":verify confirm [key]"
Confirm an in-progress verification.
.It Sy ":verify mismatch [key]"
Reject an in-progress verification due to mismatched Emoji.
.It Sy ":verify request [user id]"
Request a new verification with the specified user.
.El

.Sh "MESSAGE COMMANDS"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy ":download [path]"
Download an attachment from the selected message and save it to the optional path.
.It Sy ":open [path]"
Download and then open an attachment, or open a link in a message.
.It Sy ":edit"
Edit the selected message.
.It Sy ":editor"
Open an external
.Ev $EDITOR
to compose a message.
.It Sy ":react [shortcode]"
React to the selected message with an Emoji.
.It Sy ":unreact [shortcode]"
Remove your reaction from the selected message.
When no arguments are given, remove all of your reactions from the message.
.It Sy ":redact [reason]"
Redact the selected message with the optional reason.
.It Sy ":reply"
Reply to the selected message.
.It Sy ":cancel"
Cancel the currently drafted message including replies.
.It Sy ":replied"
Go to the message the current message replied to.
.It Sy ":unreads clear"
Mark all unread rooms as read.
.It Sy ":upload [path]"
Upload an attachment and send it to the currently selected room.
.El

.Sh "ROOM COMMANDS"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy ":create [arguments]"
Create a new room. Arguments can be
.Dq ++alias=[alias] ,
.Dq ++public ,
.Dq ++space ,
and
.Dq ++encrypted .
.It Sy ":invite accept"
Accept an invitation to the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":invite reject"
Reject an invitation to the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":invite send [user]"
Send an invitation to a user to join the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":join [room]"
Join a room or open it if you are already joined.
.It Sy ":leave"
Leave the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":members"
View a list of members of the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":room name set [name]"
Set the name of the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":room name unset"
Unset the name of the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":room dm set"
Mark the currently focused room as a direct message.
.It Sy ":room dm unset"
Mark the currently focused room as a normal room.
.It Sy ":room notify set [level]"
Set a notification level for the currently focused room.
Valid levels are
.Dq mute ,
.Dq mentions ,
.Dq keywords ,
and
.Dq all .
Note that
.Dq mentions
and
.Dq keywords
are aliases for the same behaviour.
.It Sy ":room notify unset"
Unset any room-level notification configuration.
.It Sy ":room notify show"
Show the current room-level notification configuration.
If the room is using the account-level default, then this will print
.Dq default .
.It Sy ":room tag set [tag]"
Add a tag to the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":room tag unset [tag]"
Remove a tag from the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":room topic set [topic]"
Set the topic of the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":room topic unset"
Unset the topic of the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":room topic show"
Show the topic of the currently focused room.
.It Sy ":room alias set [alias]"
Create and point the given alias to the room.
.It Sy ":room alias unset [alias]"
Delete the provided alias from the room's alternative alias list.
.It Sy ":room alias show"
Show alternative aliases to the room, if any are set.
.It Sy ":room id show"
Show the Matrix identifier for the room.
.It Sy ":room canon set [alias]"
Set the room's canonical alias to the one provided, and make the previous one an alternative alias.
.It Sy ":room canon unset [alias]"
Delete the room's canonical alias.
.It Sy ":room canon show"
Show the room's canonical alias, if any is set.
.It Sy ":room ban [user] [reason]"
Ban a user from this room with an optional reason.
.It Sy ":room unban [user] [reason]"
Unban a user from this room with an optional reason.
.It Sy ":room kick [user] [reason]"
Kick a user from this room with an optional reason.
.El

.Sh "SPACE COMMANDS"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy ":space child set [room_id] [arguments]"
Add a room to the currently focused space.
.Dq ++suggested
marks the room as a suggested child.
.Dq ++order=[string]
specifies a string by which children are lexicographically ordered.
.It Sy ":space child remove"
Remove the selected room from the currently focused space.
.El

.Sh "WINDOW COMMANDS"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy ":horizontal [cmd]"
Change the behaviour of the given command to be horizontal.
.It Sy ":leftabove [cmd]"
Change the behaviour of the given command to open before the current window.
.It Sy ":only" , Sy ":on"
Quit all but one window in the current tab.
.It Sy ":quit" , Sy ":q"
Quit a window.
.It Sy ":quitall" , Sy ":qa"
Quit all windows in the current tab.
.It Sy ":resize"
Resize a window.
.It Sy ":rightbelow [cmd]"
Change the behaviour of the given command to open after the current window.
.It Sy ":split" , Sy ":sp"
Horizontally split a window.
.It Sy ":vertical [cmd]"
Change the layout of the following command to be vertical.
.It Sy ":vsplit" , Sy ":vsp"
Vertically split a window.
.El

.Sh "TAB COMMANDS"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy ":tab [cmd]"
Run a command that opens a window in a new tab.
.It Sy ":tabclose" , Sy ":tabc"
Close a tab.
.It Sy ":tabedit [room]" , Sy ":tabe"
Open a room in a new tab.
.It Sy ":tabrewind" , Sy ":tabr"
Go to the first tab.
.It Sy ":tablast" , Sy ":tabl"
Go to the last tab.
.It Sy ":tabnext" , Sy ":tabn"
Go to the next tab.
.It Sy ":tabonly" , Sy ":tabo"
Close all but one tab.
.It Sy ":tabprevious" , Sy ":tabp"
Go to the preview tab.
.El

.Sh "SLASH COMMANDS"
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "/markdown" , Sy "/md"
Interpret the message body as Markdown markup.
This is the default behaviour.
.It Sy "/html" , Sy "/h"
Send the message body as literal HTML.
.It Sy "/plaintext" , Sy "/plain" , Sy "/p"
Do not interpret any markup in the message body and send it as it is.
.It Sy "/me"
Send an emote message.
.It Sy "/confetti"
Produces no effect in
.Nm ,
but will display confetti in Matrix clients that support doing so.
.It Sy "/fireworks"
Produces no effect in
.Nm ,
but will display fireworks in Matrix clients that support doing so.
.It Sy "/hearts"
Produces no effect in
.Nm ,
but will display floating hearts in Matrix clients that support doing so.
.It Sy "/rainfall"
Produces no effect in
.Nm ,
but will display rainfall in Matrix clients that support doing so.
.It Sy "/snowfall"
Produces no effect in
.Nm ,
but will display snowfall in Matrix clients that support doing so.
.It Sy "/spaceinvaders"
Produces no effect in
.Nm ,
but will display aliens from Space Invaders in Matrix clients that support doing so.
.El

.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Example 1: Starting with a specific profile
To start with a profile named
.Sy personal
instead of the
.Sy default_profile
value:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ iamb -P personal
.Ed
.Ss Example 2: Using an alternate configuration directory
By default,
.Nm
will use the XDG directories, but you may sometimes want to store
your configuration elsewhere.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ iamb -C ~/src/iamb-dev/dev-config/
.Ed
.Sh "REPORTING BUGS"
Please report bugs in
.Nm
or its manual pages at
.Lk https://github.com/ulyssa/iamb/issues
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr iamb 5
.Pp
Extended documentation is available online at
.Lk https://iamb.chat
